
--- Page 1 ---
WHAT IS IT?
Conventional cruise 
control can maintain 
a steady speed that 
you set. Adaptive 
cruise control (ACC) 
is an enhancement of 
conventional cruise 
control. ACC automati-
cally adjusts the speed 
of your car to match 
the speed of the car 
in front of you. If the 
car ahead slows down, 
ACC can automatically 
match it. Once the car 
ahead moves out of 
your lane or accelerates 
beyond your car’s set 
speed, your ACC allows 
your car to return to 
the speed that you have set. Other than setting your speed, 
you only need to turn on the system and select your preferred 
following distance.
HOW TO USE IT?
The specific controls will be different depending on your 
particular car type, but usually you will have to start by setting a 
cruising speed and a following distance to the car ahead.
Activation/Deactivation
Most systems are operated by controls on the steering wheel. 
You can also intervene at any time by use of the brake or  
accelerator pedal. 
Setting the speed
You can set the speed using the +/- speed button. You can also 
accelerate as normal until the desired speed is reached. Then 
you press a button to have the ACC “remember” the speed. 
Most ACC systems will work down to about 25 MPH.
Setting the distance
ACC systems allow you to set a following distance, or time interval, 
between your car and the car ahead. ACC systems provide various 
car-to-car distance options, such as: short, medium, or long dis-
tance. You can change the setting at any time as traffic conditions 
change. A longer setting is recommended for most driving.
HOW DOES  
IT WORK?
Like standard cruise 
control systems, ACC 
keeps your car at the 
speed you set, as long 
as there is nothing in 
front of you. A sensor unit is added to determine  
the distance between your car and other cars in front you.
Speed and distance sensors.  
ACC uses information from two sensors: a distance sensor that 
monitors the gap to the car ahead and a speed sensor that 
automatically accelerates and decelerates your car. ACC uses 
information from these sensors to adjust your speed and  
maintain the set distance from the car in front of you.
Looking under the hood: Radar-based systems.  
Let’s take a look at one ACC technology: radar-based ACC. Some 
ACC systems send radar waves that reflect off objects in front of 
your car. Based on the radar reflection, ACC uses distance, direc-
tion and relative speed to detect if the car is within the distance 
you set. ACC predicts the path of your car and then decides 
whether any of the vehicles ahead are within your set distance.
Understand
ADAPTIVE CRUISE CONTROL

--- Page 2 ---
Your ACC system looks directly in front of you for other vehicles. Because it 
only looks forward, your ACC system may have trouble detecting traffic on 
curving roads.
In the image to the right, see how ACC’s field of view works when the road 
curves. Its view may include traffic in another lane. It may also miss vehicles  
in your own lane. In situations like this, your ACC system may not react  
appropriately to the traffic around you. In the example, your ACC system  
may unexpectedly slow down if it detects the semi in the other lane.
What would you do?
Look at scenario in the image to the right. Imagine yourself driving the  
blue vehicle. Think about the questions shown below.
CHALLENGE #1: CURVING ROADS
Experts’ Challenge Answer: 
How might your ACC system respond?   When Car A goes around the curve, my ACC system 
may not detect it and the system may unexpectedly accelerate.  
How should you respond?  If my system accelerates, I should maintain a safe speed manually 
until the road is straighter.
ADAPTIVE CRUISE CONTROL
As you approach the curve, how might                                     How should you respond? 
your ACC system respond?

--- Page 3 ---
Just as your ACC system may struggle with curving roads, it may also 
have trouble on hilly roads. ACC looks straight in front of the vehicle, 
and can’t bend its view up or down hills (or around curves). The image 
shows how the system’s field of view may not see everything when on a 
hilly road, and may respond incorrectly. In the example, your car’s ACC 
system may not detect Car B, and could unexpectedly speed up.
What would you do?
Look at scenario in the image to the right. Imagine yourself driving 
the blue vehicle. Think about the questions shown below.
CHALLENGE #2: HILLS
Experts’ Challenge Answer: 
How might your ACC system respond?  When Car A goes over the hill, my ACC system may 
not detect it and unexpectedly accelerate.
How should you respond?  If my ACC system accelerates, I should disengage ACC and 
maintain a safe speed manually until the road is less hilly.
ADAPTIVE CRUISE CONTROL
As you approach the the top of the hill,                                      How should you respond? 
how might your ACC system respond?

--- Page 4 ---
ACC systems detect other vehicles directly in front of you. 
Because of the system’s field of view, ACC may not detect 
a vehicle that is in your lane but not directly ahead of your 
car. This can include vehicles that are merging into or out 
of your lane. In the example, Car A may be outside of your 
ACC’s field of view and yet still in front of you.
What would you do?
Look at the scenario in the image to the right. Imagine  
yourself driving the blue vehicle. Think about the  
questions shown below.
CHALLENGE #3: MERGING TRAFFIC
Experts’ Challenge Answer: 
How might your ACC system respond?  If Car B moves into its field of view too quickly, my ACC system 
may brake unexpectedly or shut off. 
How should you respond? I should monitor the system and traffic, and take control manually if necessary.
ADAPTIVE CRUISE CONTROL
How might your ACC system respond?                                    How should you respond?

--- Page 5 ---
ACC systems can help regulate speed in traffic, but they 
may struggle in heavy traffic. Your ACC system has to de-
tect a vehicle and also judge its distance and speed. Quick 
lane changes and braking in heavy traffic situations may 
cause the system to struggle. In slow traffic, many systems 
will disengage below a certain speed.
What would you do?
Look at the scenario in the image to the right. Imagine  
yourself driving the blue vehicle. Think about the  
questions shown below.
CHALLENGE #4: SLOW AND HEAVY TRAFFIC
Experts’ Challenge Answer: 
How might your ACC system behave in this situation? Since many ACC systems are not designed for travel 
at less than 25 mph, the ACC system may turn off in a slow, heavy traffic scenario,. 
ACC works best in higher speed conditions and has limitations in slow traffic (e.g., below 25 mph). 
How should you respond? Use ACC in conditions where you can drive greater than 25 mph. 
ADAPTIVE CRUISE CONTROL
How might your ACC system behave in this situation?          How should you respond?
